The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject matter of the present show is early science fiction. What one
identifies as early science fiction, of course, depends upon what his definition
of science fiction is. If you want to call any literature of a fantastic nature
science fiction, then you'd have to go back to the beginning of human
expression. Consider stories of gods, creation myths, and early religions of
science fiction, but we're not going to go back that far. It's more useful to
place the origins of science fiction, I think, much further forward in history.
At a time when the word science means something, and when the naivete and
superstitions of the ancient world have mostly given way to a truer, more modern
sense of reality. But to get to the present, or further forward in history,
we'll have to pass over authors like Jonathan Swift, who wrote Gulliver's
Travels, and Edgar Allan Poe, both of whom are considered as writing early
science fiction, and move up to 1817, when Mary Shelley published what many
critics would consider the first science fiction novel. And that book was
Frankenstein, and the reason it's considered the first science fiction novel is
that it uses science in the story, in that Frankenstein is a creature who is
built, who is put together out of, I guess you could say, spare parts, and then
it's brought to life by its creator
using the scientific forces of electricity, rather than some magical force that
you might find in an earlier work. But I think Shelley's treatment of her
material, Mary Shelley, just the way she handled it, I think qualifies a novel
to be one of science fiction. But at the time she wrote it, there was no real
separation between fantastic literature and realistic literature. There was no
categorizing process, and literature was simply literature. The origin of the
term science fiction didn't occur until the 1920s, when for various reasons it
began to exist as a separate literary category. But immediately before that time
there were three major writers who had an immense influence on the field. A
Frenchman, Jules Verne, an Englishman, H.G. Wells, and an American, Edgar Rice
Burroughs. Jules Verne was born in 1828 and published his first science fiction
book, Five Weeks in a Balloon, in 1863. A lot of people considered Verne to be a
prophet for seeing a lot of the technological things that we have. Actually, I
think he was more just a good science fiction writer. He took a lot of concepts
that were on the verge of coming about, things like the electric light, the
submarine and air travel, explorations that were going on. He took all of these
elements, some scientific, some geographical, and physics and other types of
scientific accoutrements, and blended them into an adventure story format. I
think maybe this is one of the prime or primal manifestations of science fiction
as a form in itself. You could almost say that for his own time he would be a
hard science fiction writer in that almost all of his stories, as you say, they
had a great deal of adventure or reader interest, but they also were based on
some sort of scientific concept. Say, the giant cannon in the book, From the
Earth to the Moon, from which they made a movie. He goes into long explanations
on the acceleration needed to reach the moon, the muzzle velocity of the cannon
to shoot the projectile. So, really, fairly definite science for his day. That's
true, although some of the science as seen today is, I guess you could call it a
little dated, his cannon to shoot people to the moon. But many of the things he
wrote were very well thought out, such as in 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, his
extremely powerful, highly developed submarine that traveled around the world,
mostly underwater, harkens to today's nuclear-powered submarines. Of course, he
created an unforgettable character in that book, Captain Nemo, almost the
archetype of the mysterious, powerful scientist who is living by himself,
conducting experiments. I think that fascinates a lot of readers of the book and
viewers, of course, of the movie, too. That's true. He was an extremely well
-developed character, and more is told about him in the sequel to 20,000 Leagues
Under the Sea, Mysterious Island. In Mysterious Island, we see a lighter vein of
work that Verne was caught up in in a lot of his earlier works, the bohemian,
romantic type of castaway on a lost island somewhere, Robinson Crusoe-type
stories. There are quite a few of these in his earlier works. Yeah, that book,
in a way, reminded me of Robinson Crusoe, the way that these castaways are able
to master their environment and save themselves with their inventions.
Another book in that vein, that kind of light vein, was a very little-known work
of Verne's, "Dr. Ox's Experiment" in 1874. It's sort of a farce. He predicates a
story where a scientist accidentally injects some sort of super-oxygen mixture
into a town and accelerates life where everybody suddenly is accelerated into a
faster pace of living. Around that time, too, he published off on a comet. A
comet collides with Earth. It just happens to carry off a little portion of the
Earth with our heroes on it. They happen to be playing chess. They're carried
off. Sooner or later, they get back to Earth. When the comet comes back and gets
near Earth, they're able to sort of jump back on through a balloon. This sort of
goes back to some earlier things or earlier types of fantastic fiction that were
written called, I guess for lack of a better term, fantastic voyages, where
people go off on marvelous adventures like in his Around the World in 80 Days
where they travel around the world by various means in an 80-day time period,
which for them was very, very quick. In his Off on a Comet where they travel off
of the Earth because the comet that collides with the Earth and part of it's
broken off. And also in his story From Earth to the Moon where we travel from
the Earth to the Moon via a projectile shot from a cannon. All these have
fantastic voyages in them which really go back to a little earlier period of
fantastic fiction. Yeah, that's the category I think that a lot of Verne's
fiction can be put in, the fantastic voyage, the wonderful journey, you know,
something like that. Some of his later work is interesting too. A book in the
early 1880s, The Steam House, where he seemed to have extrapolated a house
trailer which is pulled by mechanical elephants powered by steam, which is sort
of an interesting idea. And also in the mid-1880s, a book called Robur the
Conqueror. In that book he did for helicopters or huge helicopter-like airplanes
what he did for submarines in 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, but he did it for
the air. Jules Verne brought his character, Robur, back in the novel Master of
the World where he depicts science and his main character is a little more
sinister than he had in some of his earlier work where the character is somewhat
malevolent and science is not being used for the good of mankind or at least for
the benefit of mankind but is being used for that one person's own gain. In
fact, it seems like he sort of enjoyed toying with this concept in his later
works. I think there was one story even where he pitted a good outcome of
science versus a bad outcome of science. And it seems like a lot of his later
works are darker, more thoughtful about the future of science in realistic
terms.
Any moviegoer, of course, would recognize the fact that a lot of Verne's more
popular novels have been made into Hollywood movies. Five Weeks in a Balloon,
for instance, was a well-known production from one of Verne's books. Around the
World in 80 Days, of course, is a classic of filmmaking. 20,000 Leagues Under
the Sea, done by Walt Disney, of course, is a favorite, especially with the
kids. A Mysterious Island was another that was made into a movie. Yes,
especially after the copyrights on Verne's works ran out around 1950, I think,
there was a flurry of the movies of his works. One of the favorites, I think, of
a lot of people is Journey to the Center of the Earth. It was a milestone, I
think, in the cinema in terms of science fiction movies. It had a lot of on
-location shooting and a lot of very extravagant special effects and sets, which
really was one of the milestones of movie-making at that time.
You could probably say that Jules Verne was the most popular and
prolific writer of his day. He wrote through the 1860s, 1870s, the 1880s. He
contributed much to the delight of Europeans in science and technology. And
probably what one critic said of Verne is true, that he was the first science
fiction writer to make a living at the job, and I don't think science fiction
would have been the same had it not been for the influence of Jules Verne.
There are many other people writing speculative fiction or science fiction
during this period, but the next major writer was H.G. Wells, who was born in
1866. Yeah, Wells, I think, adds something to the field that Verne didn't spend
much time with. Wells can have just as much science and as much extrapolation as
Verne did, but I think he adds some social criticism. He seems to ponder more on
the social ramifications of the inventions and things he talks about. For
instance, his first great success in 1895 was The Time Machine, in which he
pictures a far-future society, which is not always a positive place. So Wells
was, I guess you could say, making a comment on Victorian England with the
Morlocks, who were, I guess you could say, the working class, and the Eloi, who
were the upper class, and the strife and turmoil between the two different
classes, only extrapolated into a far and rather grim future that he had
speculated in his book, The Time Machine. Of course, another one, The War of the
Worlds, written a few years later, is one of the classic first contact novels,
and even though Humanity came out okay, it was still not a, it was a scare book.
It was not a pleasant book, by any means. And it's amazing the impact that this
novel has had on science fiction in general, that being the creation of the
first of the bug-eyed monsters, and science fiction and science fiction films
have been full of them ever since. Yes, many films have been made of Wells'
works as well as of Verne's works, War of the Worlds, The Invisible Man, The
Time Machine that we've mentioned. Also, First Men in the Moon was made into a
movie. That's another of his novels. As was The Island of Dr. Moreau, which, if
I recall, was an extremely negative movie where this, I guess you'd call him a
mad scientist, is trying to make men out of animals, and has all sorts of
creatures which are half and half. A very scary negative book, I think, of the
misuse of science, perhaps. Yes, and also Food of the Gods is made into a motion
picture based upon that book. And one of the most interesting of Wells' work
made into a motion picture was Things to Come, based on his book Shape of Things
to Come. And he wrote the screenplay for the movie. That's characteristic of a
lot of his work, The Shape of Things to Come, where you have some sort of
holocaust or war where people are destroyed, and for a long time, civilization,
well, there is none. It's a primitive world. And out of that primitive world,
some band of scientists or some heroic far-seeing people take over and bring
humankind back to where it should be. It's sort of an ending up. I guess you'd
call it almost a utopian book because it does have a positive ending. It's one
of the first, I guess we could say, the first science fiction cataclysm novels,
too. Even at the time of the making of the movie, Wells knew that some of his
inventions, such as the cannon that shot the ship into space, was already out of
date. But they went ahead and used him anyway because they were already a
familiar figure used in literature. Oftentimes when Wells envisioned the future,
as we remarked earlier, he would present a negative picture of a future society.
That was the case in the book When the Sleeper Wakes. You have a Rip Van Winkle
type who wakes up after two centuries. And he wakes up into a world which is a
dystopia. A portion of it is useless rich people. Another portion is the
mistreated poor. He's very disillusioned when he wakes up into that sort of
dystopian society. And also, even in his more popular work, such as The
Invisible Man, oftentimes the scientific gimmick or the science he has in the
work is used for selfish reasons. In The Invisible Man, if you remember, the man
is not happy with his invisibility. It's almost as if Wells is saying, if you
wish for great powers or if you wish for great abilities or if science gives you
something great, you may have to pay a price for it. You might be sorry, as The
Invisible Man was. And in both Wells and Verne's work, there was something, I
guess, of the Victorian era in that both of the writers seemed to say at certain
times that there are certain things that man should not dabble with. man should
not play God. And this is brought forth rather graphically in The Invisible Man
where he ends up ultimately dying from him. Be careful what you wish for, you
may get it. Right. Sort of attitude. I think of Wells and Verne both, the reason
that they can be considered early science fiction writers too is that science
was really coming into its own. You know, the technology was advancing rapidly
and all sorts of things were happening. It was a very exciting time at the end
of the 19th century, the beginning of the 20th. And a lot of that excitement, of
course, it turns out in the science fiction.
There were many people writing during this time that were writing, I guess, what
you could call lost world type novels. probably one of the most well-known is H.
Rider Haggard's She, which was written in 1887. And another author who started
writing along these same lines of, I guess you could call, fantastic fiction
more than science fiction would be the American writer, Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Right. He got his start, or at least his beginning fame around 1911 when he
started to write some stories about a character named John Carter. The first one
was titled Under the Moons of Mars. Probably, besides his Tarzan work, John
Carter may be his most famous character. You'd probably have to call that heroic
fantasy, I think. There is not a lot of science in it. John Carter gets to Mars
simply by wishing to be there. And when he's on Mars, many of the apparatus
which fly through the sky and stuff like that are powered by rather mysterious
elements like the eighth ray of Barsoom and various things. But it's a wonderful
imaginative fiction, very vivid images that Burroughs creates and a very, very
unique environment. Yeah, Burroughs is a natural storyteller. He may not have,
perhaps he hasn't worn as well as Wells and Verne have with serious science
fiction readers. But he was a great storyteller. He could use vivid images.
There are a lot of space opera elements in his work, especially the John Carter
material with fair maidens having to be rescued by great heroes and bug-eyed
monsters and alien environments with different colored moons and all sorts of
things. Great ingenuity he exercised in his works. And I think he also was one
of the first writers to start inventing languages and cultures and maps to go
along with his created world. A Barsoom, I think, is what he called Mars, wasn't
it? That's true. He did detail out how the planet was, at least as far as we
knew at that time, how the planet was set up and what the canals were and the
different types of creatures and peoples that lived on Mars and their various
cultures. He's created probably some of the most elaborate and most memorable
characters that have ever been created as far as heroes go. I mean, his heroes
are larger than life, almost supermen. Tarzan is a character known throughout
the world. Movies have been made about him incessantly. They're working on some
new ones now. He just has written some extremely vivid, vivid material. I think
with the background that we've seen in Verne and Wells' works, with Burroughs,
we begin to see the blend of the different kinds of styles that would later
evolve into the real, solid pulp fiction, pulp science fiction that we see in
the 20s and 30s of America and Europe. Right. There's no real convincing science
in it. It's just a great story with a lot of vivid imagination in it and
something that readers can follow, but there's just enough explanation for you
to, oh, I don't know, want to accept it, to want to believe it. And he wrote
many of these series books such as Tarzan and John Carter of Mars and Carson of
Venus and the Pellucidar series. Some of his later work, which is also popular
with readers, though not as well-known, of course, as John Carter of Tarzan, is
At the Earth's Core, published around 1914, The Moon Maid in the early 30s, and
another one, I think, that was made into a movie, The Land That Time Forgot,
published in the mid-1920s. Burroughs also wrote many other types of work, such
as Westerns and I guess what you could call a straight romance. But he's most
well-known for his science fiction and science fantasy stories.
It was in 1926 that fantastic literature began to separate from the literary
mainstream. In that year, a man named Hugo Gernsback began publishing a pulp
magazine called Amazing Stories. The masthead of the magazine contained the word
scientifiction, Gernsback's coinage. He defined what he meant by it. By
scientifiction, I mean the Jules Verne, H.G. Wells, Edgar Allan Poe type of a
story, a charming romance intermingled with science fact and prophetic vision.
It wasn't until a few years later that the term scientifiction was changed to
science fiction. And one of the important things that happened at this time was
that the American publishing industry sort of naturally categorized itself into
sections in which there were magazines that were devoted to different
categories. Like there were magazines devoted to sports, to war, to aviation, to
adventure, to electronics, and of course, to science fiction. Science fiction
had its own magazines now. Gernsback's Amazing Stories was simply the first. And
from then until now, science fiction has had its own niche. One of the early
authors who sold stories to Gernsback and Amazing Stories was Jack Williamson.
He traveled in the early part of this century to what was then New Mexico
territory. He arrived in a covered wagon. When in his teens, he began to read
and write science fiction, he's still living and writing high-quality works. He
spoke to the science fiction radio show about his origins as a writer and about
what it was like to write for the early pulp magazines. Well, I grew up on a
sandhill farm in the south part of this county when times were pretty grim and
I, well, wanted to be some sort of scientist without any direction or means to
get a scientific education. And a few months after Gernsback started the old
Amazing, well, I came across some copies of it and I was immediately fascinated
with experiments that worked with travel in time and spaceships to other worlds
and all sorts of wonderful things and it's been an important share of my life
ever since. At that time, he was under the influence of fantasy writer A.E.
Merritt who was noted for his overly descriptive lush prose style. At that time,
I was infatuated with Merritt I haven't re-read him for many years lest the
spell be gone but the first stories I wrote, well, were full of these attempts
at purple color illustrated with too many adjectives and later I began to try
for more convincing settings and stronger characters and fewer adjectives. He
sent a few of these early stories into Hugo Gernsback's Amazing and didn't find
out that one of them, "The Metal Man", was accepted until he saw an issue of the
magazine with an illustration from his story on the cover. I wrote these stories
on an old Remington basket model typewriter in a purple ribbon and two or three
of them came back. One of them was with a misspelled word in the title and the
metal man never did come back and I was over at Canyon, Texas walking by a
newsstand one day and I saw my metal man on the cover of Amazing and it was
quite a thrill. He remembers the close identification and sense of community
early science fiction writers felt among themselves and talks about the
categories of magazines published in the 1920s. The science fiction world has
always been a sort of special community where we, I suppose, we felt we had our
own special handle on science in the future and the shape of things to come and
though I didn't see other science fiction people very often, I read their
stories and read letters in the magazines and so forth. In those days, before
the paperbacks and before TV and before the comics, when people read a lot more
for entertainment than they do nowadays and there were really three sorts of
magazines. There were the quality magazines like Harper's and the old Scribner's
Atlantic for people with brains and the slicks printed on coated paper that
would take good advertising for people with money to spend and the pulps for
people who had neither brains nor money but we had a lot of fun in the pulps
even if we were looked down upon widely and eventually why science fiction got
recognized as being not entirely without brains let's say and nowadays there's a
little bit of money in it sometimes. The term pulp refers to a cheaply printed
magazine done on rough paper, heavy and acid content with colorful attention
getting covers. Williamson recalls that a dedicated pulp writer could earn a
decent living if he worked very hard at it. Gernsback paid a half a cent a word
or less which meant well you could get $25 for a short story and $75 for a
novelette but Clayton paid two cents a word and up which is one reason maybe the
Clayton magazines went bankrupt in the Great Depression but that meant that I
could pound out 4,000 words a day for two days and earn $160 which was a
fabulous feat for a farm kid in Depression days. According to Williamson
Gernsback didn't always print stories heavy with science. He was in business to
interest readers and it took stories full of adventure for that. He preached a
gospel that science fiction was sugar-coated science that it was education and
he got a whole panel of experts with degrees that were supposed to vet the
science and science wonder stories when he started that. But actually I think
that was as much for well to impress the readers as anything else because he did
use true science in his stories when he could get it but he also printed a lot
of stories that were pretty wild. I think always in the magazine the adventure
element was more important than the science. The readers of pulp magazines took
an active interest in the material being published. They would write letters to
magazines such as Amazing with comments and suggestions. This created a sense of
fellowship among readers and was the beginning of science fiction fandom. Of
course I didn't know many people in the locality who read science fiction but in
those days the backs of the magazines were filled up with letters and tiny type
from readers and that was the principal reader response. I think the editors
favored them because they didn't have to pay for the letters and they were well
interesting to us and I used to write them myself as well as read them. It was
the beginning of fandom I suppose. A term that is used to describe much of this
early pulp science fiction is space opera. Some present day readers and writers
look down on space opera but Williamson disagrees. I've never objected to space
opera. I still think it's wonderful and I even think that Star Wars could have
been made out of my Legion stories as well as it was from something else. I
enjoyed Star Wars tremendously as a sort of adolescent daydream and well the
pulp readers were mostly young and as naive as I was and the space opera was a
sort of symbolic escape from all sorts of things. The pulp era of science
fiction didn't last. It faded out into the golden age of science fiction when
large publishing houses started issuing novels in paperback form. Williamson
thinks that there were reasons for the extinction of the pulp tradition.
Probably. I was growing up and the readers were growing up. That's something
that's been going on in science fiction at least in American science fiction all
along. I think you can draw a distinction between let's say European or
mainstream science fiction on the one hand which has always been recognized and
treated as literature and the pulp American science fiction which was looked
down on but as the readers of that grew older some of them started writing some
of them started editing magazines most of them outgrew science fiction but some
of them didn't so there was a continual increase in the education the
sophistication and so forth of the whole field maybe you used to call it a
diversification because there's still a readership for Edgar Rice Burroughs and
Robert E. Howard and whatever but there are also people who let's say former
fans who are now academic fans who are teaching science fiction courses and
writing scholarly articles on science fiction to meet the publisher Parrish test
and so forth so that essentially the field is just diversified into all sorts of
levels and areas of interest
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.